-----
kind: article
title: "5.30 am"
tags:
- brazil
created_at: 2008/08/24
permalink: 530-am
toc: false
-----

<p>(Tuesday 19th August, 5.30am, <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mato_Grosso_do_Sul">Mato Grosso do Sul</a>, Brazil)</p>

<p>It's 5.30am and the sun is just beginning to colour the eastern horizon a delicate peach, shading to deep indigo at the zenith. The river is very still in the silver half light, and a veil of mist hovers just above the surface of the water. A cool, light breeze drifts shreds of mist, like smoke, towards me, as I stand on the boardwalk watching. On three sides, groups of <a href="http://www.arthurgrosset.com/sabirds/chaco chachalaca.html">chaco chachalacas</a><sup id="r1-240808"><a href="#f1-240808">1</a></sup> strike up their raucous song, like a drunken military tattoo performed entirely on amplified kazoos, and backed occasionally by a howler monkey chorus. In the brief breaks between chaco sets, I can hear the various whistles, purrs and mews of other birds against the earth-shaking three-note bass growls of caiman the wildlife starts its day. The dawn here is often peaceful, but seldom quiet.</p>

<p>In the west, the full moon is still high, and as the sun rises, the cold, silver moon-shadows are gradually erased and replaced with the deep, warm sun-shadows. Dawn happens fast here: as I watch, the sun hauls itself above the horizon, bloodily dripping and setting fire to the landscape. Another day begins.</p>

<p><sup id="f1-240808">1</sup> They can be heard 2 km away, so you can imagine that when you're standing right next to them (or vice-versa), conversation is impossible, and earplugs are advisable. I once had to break off a conversation with my colleague because of noisy chacos above us. It's no use shouting at them, either (I've tried) -- you just have to wait until they're finished. <a href="#r1-240808">&uarr;</a></p>


